# Newton's Laws of Motion

Isaac Newton discovered 3 laws of physics that, when used together, can be used to explain, predict, and understand the motion of literally any object. They are fairly simple concepts, but applying them correctly will let you understand how everything in the universe moves - including rockets. This makes them very important for space travel, and this camp.

The first law simply states that objects don't move without something pushing them. Also known as *inertia*, this means that if nothing pushes on it, things will keep doing whatever they were already doing. If you don't hit the gas in a car, it won't move; if it's already moving it will keep going until you hit the brakes. The only reason that things don't go forever after being pushed once is that things like air resistance and friction slow them down. In space, there is no air resistance, so once your rocket starts moving on a path it won't leave it unless you use the engine. This is fairly simple but very, very important! If an object changes its path, something must have pushed it.

The second law gives the mathematical relationship between a push and the object being pushed. Formally, it states that Force = Mass \* Acceleration. We'll go into more detail on all of those things later, but the basic concept is that pushing something twice as hard affects it twice as much, and something that weighs 2 pounds will move half as much as something that weighs 1 pound. What this means for your rocket is that a stronger engine will make it go faster, and a heavier rocket will go slower! Simple enough, but remembering that the two are directly related is important.

Let's look at this inside Kerbal Space Program. You should have a save file available called *1-Newton’s Second Law*. Go ahead and open it up and look at your list of active flights. Click on your Command Center, the building __. There should be two rockets on the Mun, *Weak* and *Strong*. Both of these are currently at rest, and have the exact same weight, but the one labeled *Strong* has an engine twice as powerful. Click the Fly! button to take command of a rocket, and hit the spacebar to ignite it's engine. You can see its speed in the bottom of your screen, above the 'navball'. Don't worry about where you send it for now, just watch the speed. If you launch them both at the same time and switch between them, *Strong* should be moving exactly twice as fast. 

The third and final law says that **for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction**. This means that when you push on an object, the object pushes back. This is incredibly important for rockets! A rocket moves forward because it pushes exhaust backward just as hard. The exhaust goes much, much faster than the rocket, though. This is because it weighs less! Following the second law, the same push makes the light exhaust go much faster than the heavy rocket.

Let’s go back to the game and explore these concepts. If you open up the save file *2-Newton’s Laws*, there will be a rocket in orbit around Kerbin that might look a little odd. It has a very large and a very small bit, connected with separatrons. A separatron will, when activated, push on both sides equally hard. You should be able to see the middle bit in between the two separators stay in place, while the small side rockets away and the large side slowly drifts. Even though the middle bit is pushed twice, by the separatron on each end of it, it doesn't move. Why?
